Add TLD proposal for Epsilon: export DeltaLake tables to Unity (#5903)
treeverse/lakeFS: design/open/epsilon-unity/epsilon-unity-exporter.md

to Unity.

It _reads_ Delta Lake metadata the lakeFS repository at a given ref and
path.  The Delta Lake repository describes the [Delta Transaction Log
Protocol][deltalake-format] used for this Delta Lake metadata.  Some fields
hold _path references_ to specific Delta Lake data objects.[^1]

The input Delta Lake file is at some location
`lakefs://REPO/REF/input/path/`.  That URI can hold data files (Parquets).
It also holds metadata files under a prefix `_delta_log`.  The output Delta
Lake file will be at some location `s3://BUCKET/output/path/`.  It holds
only metadata, so it holds only objects in prefix
`s3://BUCKET/output/path/_delta_log/`.

Epsilon _transforms_ the metadata of the input file:

* In the first version we shall drop CRC files.  A later version will
  restore these.  (These files are 
* For every path reference in the metadata, it creates a _translated path
  reference_.  The translated path reference is always an absolute on the
  provider blockstore:
  - An _absolute_ path reference `lakefs://REPO/REF/...`, is translated to
    its matching physical path on the provider blockstore by querying lakeFS.

>   - A _relative_ path reference `.../...` is expanded into an absolute path

Reviewer: Why do we have to expand and translate these and not keep them relative?

    reference under the root directory, then that absolute path is
    translated to its matching physical path on the provider blockstore by
    querying lakeFS.
  - Delta Lake "DV files" may have an additional "base-85" path encoding.
    Such a path has its base-85 decoded into a UUID, that UUID is then
    expanded to a relative path, which is finally translated into its

>     matching physical path on the provider blockstore by querying lakeFS.

Reviewer: I wonder if we can configure Delta to write only relative paths and then just copy without translation.

* The `_delta_log/_last_checkpoint` file is translated to refer to a  (if it exists).
* Each metadata file, including other files that may require no translation,
  is output to `s3://BUCKET/output/path/_delta_log/`; currently it seems
  that we will be able to maintain the last key components.[^2]

[^1]: However there are _no_ documented path-prefix fields.

[^2]: TBD: Are `.s3-optimization-...` (empty!) files safe to transfer?
    Should we transfer them? 

## Integration on lakeFS.Cloud

On lakeFS.Cloud we will be able to integrate Epsilon as hooks that run on
commit and on merge.  We can definitely do so in post-commit and post-merge
hooks.  But it seems possible that we will even be able to provide them as

> pre-commit and pre-merge hooks - probably even nicer for users.

Reviewer: Not sure about that. Commit may fail after pre hook finished.

## Execution plan

### Phase 0: Minimal version / PoC

#### Goal

Provide a minimal working environment.  It will provide users (readers) with
the intended experience, but require toil to update the table for each ref.
For instance, users should be able to see whether storing the ref as the
schema component of table names is in fact convenient.

#### What

> We will provide Epsilon as a standalone executable.  It will export a single

Reviewer: Can it be a Lua script? 🤔

Author: Anything is possible.  Not sure I want to do that.

1. This is a substantial piece of code.
1. It requires permissions -- at a minimum to write to _random path users defined in their Unity catalog_.  I'd rather not put those inside a Lua script running on the instance.
1. Poor ecosystem.  For instance we require a _specific type_ of Base-85 decoding, and I'd rather have a standard one.  We may need to write to S3 using STS authentication (which is common in Unity) -- need to add that to our library.  String editing in Lua is not fun.
1. Lua is not particularly memory-efficient.  JSON libraries are generally _not_ SAX-style, so we will end up holding an entire metadata file in memory and editing it (this is also considerably more convenient).  While holding many MiB of data in memory is fine for a dedicated microservice, I don't want to do it on a lakeFS cluster.  (For instance, a _larger_ installation probably has larger files.  A larger files means more metadata, so _every cluster member_ will need more memory!  It makes no sense to limit number of instances because of this, so scaling becomes quadratic in memory.  This is an unnecessary design force to add.

   Microservices FTW!

> # Epsilon TLD: Export Delta Lake Files from lakeFS to Unity

Reviewer 2: Epsilon since it approaches zero?

## Problem and scope

**Note:** Wherever this document refers to the "provider blockstore", this
is the blockstore used by the lakeFS backend: AWS S3, Azure, or in future
Google Cloud Storage.

Unity is a new platform from DataBricks that allows serverless query and
data governance and lineage.  Currently Unity does not offer a way for full
lakeFS integration:

* It supports _only_ a limited set of FileSystems -- ruling out the use of
  the lakeFS API and/or lakeFSFS.
* It can only use provider blockstore endpoints -- ruling out the use of alternative S3
  interface providers such as the lakeFS S3 gateway (or indeed MinIO).

> * It requires AWS STS authentication -- ruling out the use of lakeFS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It requires AWS/Azure RBAC authentication -- ruling out the use of lakeFS
```
?

  authentication, as Unity has no way of proving its identity to lakeFS
  based only on its available provider blockstore identity.

As a first step we can use what is available on DataBricks today to offer
*read-only* access to Delta Lake tables on Unity.

Epsilon will export Delta Lake files.  These may be written to lakeFS using
lakeFSFS; obviously the writers _do **not** use Unity_.  We shall then use
Epsilon to export the Delta Lake metadata objects, making the Delta Lake
file available as a Unity table.  In line with lakeFS, Epsilon exports only
the metadata files of Delta Lake.  The actual data files (Parquets) are used
in-place by the exported table.

## User flow

### Configuration

User-side configuration includes:

* An external catalog defined on Unity.  It is stored on provider blockstore
  (_not_ lakeFS).  We _recommend_ exporting tables for a ref to a schema

>   named for that ref.

Reviewer 2: an example might be beneficial here.

* In the first version we shall drop CRC files.  A later version will
  restore these.  (These files are not required by Delta!)
* For every path reference in the metadata, it creates a _translated path
  reference_.  When mapping to a physical path, lakeFS destroys all
  information encoded in its paths.  So _all paths to data files must be
  translated into absolute paths on the storage namespace_, whether absolute
  or relative.  The translated path reference is always an absolute on the
  provider blockstore:
  - An _absolute_ path reference `lakefs://REPO/REF/...`, is translated to
    its matching physical path on the provider blockstore by querying lakeFS.
  - A _relative_ path reference `.../...` is expanded into an absolute path
    reference under the root directory, then that absolute path is
    translated to its matching physical path on the provider blockstore by
    querying lakeFS.
  - Delta Lake "DV files" may have an additional "base-85" path encoding.
    Such a path has its base-85 decoded into a UUID, that UUID is then
    expanded to a relative path, which is finally translated into its
    matching physical path on the provider blockstore by querying lakeFS.

> * The `_delta_log/_last_checkpoint` file (if it exists) is translated to

Reviewer 2: I think that this file is in the format:
`{"version":n,"size":N}`
and doesn't include pathnames at all.
